One overcast spring afternoon, James Spader was lurking in plain sight, standing on the stoop of the Greenwich Village townhouse where he lives, wearing a sport coat, a fedora and a bright purple scarf, smoking a cigarette and talking on a cellphone with the producers of his NBC series, “The Blacklist.”

“Come, come in,” Mr. Spader said with eerie alacrity. He waved his hand, a gesture aimed at this reporter, though you never know with him: He could have been signaling any pedestrian who happened to make eye contact.

Up a few flights of creaky stairs to the home of this mercurial 55-year-old actor, who has played many alluring characters over a four-decade span: the manipulative preppies of “Pretty in Pink” and “Less Than Zero”; the sexual misfits of “White Palace,” “Crash” and “Secretary”; the flat-out kooks of “Lincoln” and “The Office.” Some of them had hidden hearts of gold, and others were unrepentant predators.

Like the man who inhabits it, Mr. Spader’s inner sanctum is not overtly dangerous nor unspeakably bizarre. Scattered around the apartment were coffee-table art books and the Lego toys of his 6-year-old son, Nathanael.

James Spader at Disney Studios in Burbank, Calif. Credit Amy Dickerson for The New York Times
Yet even at a moment of maximum popularity for Mr. Spader, when “The Blacklist” has become a hit and he is about to play the title villain in the superhero epic “Avengers: Age of Ultron,” some essential part of him remains inscrutable and comfortably weird.

It is a weirdness manifest whenever Mr. Spader speaks in perfectly formed sentences, a baritone voice, an automatic pace and an unpredictable volume.

When he discusses the narrative challenges of “The Blacklist,” on which he plays the reformed criminal mastermind Raymond (Red) Reddington, Mr. Spader might as well be describing his general outlook on life.

“You really can find yourself not being able to see the forest for the trees,” he said.

“And then,” he added, his voice rising without warning or provocation, “at times not being able to see the trees for the forest.”

His voice dropped to a confessional whisper: “Really, it can be complicated.”

But his acting career could not be simpler, Mr. Spader says, because there is no strategy or calculation behind it.

“You can tell there’s no plan, can’t you?” he said with a gleeful laugh. “My trajectory has not been an unbroken line. It’s always been piecemeal.”

Referring to himself in the third person as he sometimes does, Mr. Spader added: “To a great degree, one’s holding on, just trying to stay on. There are times where you feel somewhat in control of the beast. I’m not really sure one entirely is.”

“Age of Ultron,” which Mr. Spader filmed in London on a rare hiatus from “The Blacklist,” was his first exposure to blockbuster-scale moviemaking since the 1994 science-fiction feature “Stargate.” It was not much of a break from his intense television series, and required him to spend many hours wearing a cumbersome light-sensitive, motion-capture costume.

Advertisement

Continue reading the main story
Joss Whedon, the director and writer of “Age of Ultron,” said: “He had to wear some silly clothes and a helmet that shined two lights right in your face. He said to me at one point, ‘I’m constantly reacting to things emotionally that aren’t actually happening.’ ”

But, as Mr. Spader said of the Ultron experience, “What’s the point of doing this unless I do all of it?”

Photo

Mr. Spader in a scene from “The Blacklist.” Credit David Giesbrecht/NBC
Long after having cast aside his Massachusetts prep-school upbringing to work menial jobs and study acting in New York, he now works a relentless schedule on “The Blacklist,” the NBC thriller that drew more than 25 million viewers for an episode that followed this year’s Super Bowl, and on this visit was preparing for this season’s 19th and 20th installments.

“An hourlong drama,” Mr. Spader said evenly, “really does swallow you whole and chews you up and refuses to spit you out.”

Colleagues who have known Mr. Spader since his first flourishing in the 1980s say that he has always projected a mixture of confidence and eccentricity, naïveté and shrewdness.

Robert Downey Jr., who appeared with Mr. Spader in “Tuff Turf” and “Less Than Zero,” recalled that before they shot a frame of film together, Mr. Spader was ready to take him under his wing.

“He’s already calling me Bobby and telling me what hotel I should stay at,” Mr. Downey said.

Slipping into an affectionate imitation of Mr. Spader’s elegant monotone, Mr. Downey said: “The Chateau is mellow. It’s like a castle. The Sportsmen’s Lodge elevator smells like urine. It’s up to you.”

Since then, Mr. Downey said that, though they may go months or years without seeing each other, Mr. Spader always talks to him like he is picking up from where their last conversation left off.

“You’ll bump into him on the street,” Mr. Downey said, “and he’ll go, ‘Oh, Bobby, Bobby, you know what I forgot to tell you, when we were talking about why blues music is everything?’ ”

Since the era of Ronald Reagan and John Hughes, Mr. Spader shed his reputation as a pretty boy and played intricate characters with unconventional erotic tastes.

As to why he was so often cast in those roles, “I don’t know what the hell it says about me,” he said. “I don’t know if I’m the best person to answer that, really.”

Maggie Gyllenhaal, who played his sexually submissive subordinate in the 2002 romance “Secretary,” said that Mr. Spader created a safe space for her to play her masochistic character and protected her, “but not in the sentimental way you might imagine.”

Ms. Gyllenhaal remembered him telling her early on — “almost like with a period in between each word” — that on his projects, “I always find one ally. This time, it’s you.” He also kept “really clear boundaries outside of work,” she said, on what was “such an intensely sexual movie.”

Photo

Mr. Spader and Robert Downey Jr. on the set of “Avengers: Age of Ultron.” Credit Jay Maidment/Marvel
On another occasion, Ms. Gyllenhaal recalled, Mr. Spader was “lying on a couch and he said, ‘Could someone please have a very expensive box of chocolates brought to my trailer?’ ”

Advertisement

Continue reading the main story
A couple of days later, she said, Mr. Spader invited her to his trailer and “offered me one chocolate from his very expensive box of chocolates.”

With each new film or show, Mr. Spader said, he is looking simply for changes of pace and never considering whether it possesses “a broader appeal, beyond my perverted sensibility.”

When David E. Kelley, the creator of the ABC comedy-drama “The Practice,” wanted him to play the oddball Alan Shore, the character who would reshape the series into the spinoff “Boston Legal,” Mr. Spader said that was all he needed to hear.

Advertisement

“His entire intent was to burn down the house he just built!” Mr. Spader said, getting loud again. “I thought, ‘O.K., sign me up.’ ” (He won three Emmy Awards for that role.)

He then starred on Broadway in the David Mamet drama “Race” as a palate cleanser after “Boston Legal,” and counterbalanced Steven Spielberg’s historical drama “Lincoln” with a stint on the NBC comedy “The Office.”

Playing a character called Robert California, a replacement for Steve Carell’s corporate manager, Mr. Spader “was so intense, and the intensity was such a comedic engine,” said B. J. Novak, a producer and co-star of “The Office.”

“I could be, I suppose, a little intimidated,” Mr. Novak said of Mr. Spader. “I just had a feeling inside: This is my boss. This is just a charismatic alpha.”

Asked if he had planned to return to episodic television so soon after “Boston Legal,” Mr. Spader said, “God, no, no, no, no, no, no, no.”

He paused, then added: “That’s not true. I did think I’d be going back.”

When “The Blacklist” was offered to him, Mr. Spader had been looking for another television role — ideally in cable, where the seasons are shorter — but latched onto this network pilot, which offered tantalizing questions about his character and an F.B.I. profiler played by Megan Boone.

Jon Bokenkamp, the “Blacklist” creator, said that at first, Mr. Spader “wasn’t a clear fit” for the Reddington character.

Photo

Mr. Downey and Mr. Spader in the 1987 film “Less Than Zero.” Credit 20th Century Fox
But what he brought to the role and to the show, Mr. Bokenkamp said, was “a sense of humor that wasn’t initially there.”

“It is a show that is rather dark,” Mr. Bokenkamp said, “and it would be insufferable if he couldn’t bring to it a lightness and a self-awareness that can be fun.”

That impulse, “to marry a certain irreverence with gravitas,” is what Mr. Spader said attracted him to the “Avengers” sequel, which opens May 1, and in which he plays Ultron, a malevolent artificial intelligence determined to wipe out humanity. (Or as Mr. Spader calls him, “an eight-foot robot wreaking havoc in his wake.”)

Mr. Whedon said he was “looking for somebody who could do deep, hypnotic, low-register evil that your giant robot generally requires.”

The Ultron character, Mr. Whedon said, possesses “all the logic of artificial intelligence, but can’t control how his conclusions make him feel.”

This, he said, made him a perfect fit for Mr. Spader.

“James can do that it’s-coming-out-of-the-subwoofer voice, and then he can do the most hilarious hissy fit and somehow make them part of the same character,” Mr. Whedon said. “As soon as I thought of him, there was never another name.”

Mr. Spader, who does not keep up with comic books or much popular culture, nonetheless enjoyed a scene that Mr. Whedon wrote for him in which Ultron quotes from Emily Dickinson. (In the finished film, Ultron instead quotes “I’ve Got No Strings” from Disney’s “Pinocchio.”)

The high-tech requirements of the role seemed to leave him little time to reconnect with old friends like Mr. Downey, his “Age of Ultron” co-star, who has revitalized his career playing Iron Man in the Marvel superhero movies.

Mr. Spader said, “Our lives just went” — he made a whooshing noise and spread his hands in opposite directions — “which is often the case in this business.”

“I look forward to when I’m able to be at the same place at the same time as him,” he added.

Mr. Downey said he took a certain delight that Mr. Spader was now about to join him in “the ranks of the overexposed,” so many years after they first seemed poised for Hollywood success.

Smoking another cigarette on the rooftop deck of his brownstone, Mr. Spader delighted in the simultaneous visibility and inconspicuousness he enjoys. He has a great (if diminishing) view of the Empire State Building and lives with his partner, the actress and sculptor Leslie Stefanson, near their son’s school, good restaurants and friends with no connections to the entertainment industry.

When called upon to play a madman or a murderous robot, Mr. Spader said, “I’m trying to serve my own curiosity and imagination first.”

Betraying no emotion whatsoever, he added that whatever perception his performances create, “I don’t concern myself with that very much — I just do the work.”
