You might lack an important thing, and not know it's missing. Your world looks okay, almost normal. But no, in fact it's not normal or okay at all, if you think a bit. 
What It’s About: A Short Account

Anton Voyl is ill. Insomnia and illusions assail him. Doctors, pills, visits to hospitals bring no avail. At night, Anton scrawls drafts of fictional accounts, such as a story of Aignan killing a sphinx and fucking(3), all unknowingly, his mama(3). Days and nights pass thus, all bringing only pain. His body shrinks, until, finally, oblivion claims him. 

His pal(3), Amaury Conson, looks for him. His only hint is Anton’s last puzzling mail with this post-scriptum, his last words, “This brown fox jumps quickly across a vizir’s dog.”* Dog and fox? His thoughts turn to Paris’s zoo. 

At this zoo, four pals(3) of Anton cross paths: Olga Mavrokordatos, Ottavio Ottaviani, Hassan Ibn Abbou, and said Amaury. That location containing no solutions, it is off to Ascott(4). But its racing hounds too bring no satisfaction. 

Back to Paris and an assassin kills Hassan. At his burial, his body is not found in its coffin. As with Anton’s, it too is now lost. 

Confusions multiplying, it is off to Olga’s villa by train. On that train is Arthur Wilburg Savorgnan, a buddy too of Anton’s. Augustus B. Clifford, Olga’s dad(3)-in-law owns that villa, inhabiting it with Olga and a maid, “Squaw”. Olga’s husband, Douglas Haig Clifford, is not now living, dying long ago in a fatal fall. His story, from adoption, infancy, adulthood, right to its sad conclusion is told by Augustus. 

Looking for solutions by scouring Anton’s books, a commonality is found: all talk of a blank, a void, a missing thing. Two days pass in this way, until, a crisis hits. Morbidity(2) visits Augustus and Olga. It’s panic all round. Aid is sought and at night, two additional pals, Aloysius Swann and Ottavio Ottaviani, turn up bringing information. 

Anton’s story, his past, is told to all. It is a story too of Olga, Hassan, Ottaviani, and Douglas: until now only pals but actually Anton’s long lost siblings. Sharing a Turkish clan’s DNA(6), this group bound by blood, fall victim to its Maldiction(7): a law that insists on sibling killing sibling, papa killing child. It’s clan lawfair(7) of an I for an I(7). 

Clan kids(3) all carry its birthmark, its conginatal(7) brand: a round with a small gap and a straight dash inwards. Hid by dad, Arthur, in a distribution by adoption, it’s unc(3), dad’s bro(3), that’s hunting and killing his kin, fulfilling his clan duty and his own villanous wish. 

Plots turn on plots, and in a dramatic conclusion, a culprit finally unmasks to claim victory.

Six plus six plus four months ago, I bought a book: A Void. Originally, an author (G. P*r*c) first thought of A Void (or La Disparition) in 1967. In 1994, it was brought out from a country at a north Atlantic location in which Français is usually a normal way of articulating in writing and out loud and into a form of communication which most inhabitants of this country (US of A) know. This translator was a Mr. Adair. This book is a highly fantastic book. A linguistic madman who thought it up was choosing to put A Void on papyrus without a symbol in a form of communication, this missing fifth symbol. This author, or madman, was brilliant and did it without any faults, as did translator Adair. Why? I don't know. Author was crazy as a fox is crazy.
In this book, this Void, I found no lack of things for stimulation of my mind. In fact, Void is not a void at all. Pagination # 104:
`Twas upon a midnight tristful, I sat poring, wan and wistful
Through many a quant and curious listful of my consorts slain.
"Aha!" you shout out (not vocalizing too loudly, I wish), "that's a translation of an 18-stanza rhyming story by--"
But I cannot put to papyrus what you shout. I can, though, say that A Void lists author of rhyming as "Arthur Gordon Pym," thus naming a man from a work that this actual author did not finish. (Two or 3 of a group would say this man was too full of phobia at his own construction, à la an individual of physics, biology, and so on, in Mary's horror story about a monstrous guy known as Frank in a common-drinking-glass [I ask your pardon for this bad pun].) That rhyming is uno of many mind-stimulating "yummy things" you'll find in this book, which riffs on such works as Moby Dick, Milton's "Utopia" Lost, "Bill Bard's" Danish King Jr., and many classic puzzling/frightful works.
Only complaint: whodunit halts, stops at finish: author can't hold on to organizing thoughts to make whodunit work.
In conclusion: look at this book.
